title: 
    name: "Optimised Emotions"
    html: "Optimised Emotions"
    short: Optimised Emotions
id: optimised-emotions
featured: 3
date: "25/08/2020"
main_img_data:
    file_name: "optimised-emotions-main.jpg"
    size: "1800x1800"
    caption: "Belgrade, 2020"
lead: "By subverting and recontextualizing SEO paradigms and digital marketing regimes, this essay proposes novel poetic strategies. It was orginally published in the book <span class=italic-style><a href='#' target='_blank'>Optimised Poetics</a></span>, written by <a href='https://monoskop.org/Darija_Medi%C4%87' target='_blank'>Darija Medić</a> and me."
lead_short: "Essay from the book <span class=italic-style>Optimised Poetics</span>"
content:
    - type: "txt"
      html: "<p>How are words used today? Of course, we write novels and we curse, as humans have always done, we sing and we name things. Yet, drowned in endless digital streams, we feel something is different. A friend of mine, a short-story writer from the US, told me that when she writes primarily for the Internet, she carefully chooses words for her stories in terms of Internet search terms associated with topics she writes about. For instance, if she writes about immigration issues, she looks for keywords Internet algorithms associate with these social topics. The goal is to get her story classified and positioned within the right thematic cluster, so it could be found more easily by possible readers who use Internet search engines, the primary one being Google. In other words, she is writing for both humans and algorithms. One could say she is doing search engine optimization (SEO)<sup id='s1'>1</sup> of her literary prose.</p>
      <p>In his paper “Linguistic Capitalism and Algorithmic Mediation”<sup id='s2'>2</sup>, prof. Frederic Kaplan explains the logic of word commodification and monetization: “Google is certainly the first economic actor to have understood that the logic of linguistic capitalism implies not an economy of attention but an economy of expression. The goal in this new economic game is not to catch the users’ gaze but to develop intimate and sustainable linguistic relationships with the largest possible number of users in order to model linguistic change accurately and mediate linguistic expression systematically.” In this econo-linguistic game, words are mere indices of goods and services. Economic indicators, markers, vectors, taxonomy mechanisms for machine classification. “Should we expect something like a pidgin or a creole to emerge,” Kaplan rightly wonders, “whose syntax and vocabulary would be influenced by the linguistic capacity of machines and economic value of words?”.</p>
      <p>This new dialect, however, this techno-capitalist creole, might still not be completely devoid of poetic value. Pip Thornton<sup id='s3'>3</sup>, a researcher and artist from Edinburgh, created a body of text-based work related to linguistic capitalism<sup id='s4'>4</sup>. “While concentrating on exploiting language for money,” she says, “Google have in effect let money control the narrative.”<sup id='s5'>5</sup></p>
      <p>Similar to Thornton, Optimised Emotions utilise Google Ad Keyword Planner, an app that helps customers choose right keywords for their Google Ads. Among other things, the app names prices of keywords you decide to use in your ad. This is how the price for the ad is determined, via a bid system. Prices change all the time, yet not drastically. Words associated with lucrative industries are more expensive than others, as people google them more often. In addition, the app gives you additional keyword suggestions based on what these algorithms thinks you want to sell with the text you provided. Through these optimal suggestions, you can guess what does Google assume you are selling with your words – because of course you are selling something, that is what words are for, right?</p>
      <p>Keyword Planner is meant to be used for marketing-driven text, yet no law exists that forbid you from putting any text as an input to its algorithm. This is how Optimized Emotions work: you put an old poem inside the Keyword Planner, and let the algorithm tell you its monetary value (if it were an ad) and how you could optimise your word choice (if you wish your ad to be more effective). The results are recontextualized as new poetry.</p>
      <p>So, how does Google interpret local poetry<sup id='s6'>6</sup>? Or – what does Google think local poets advertize? Results vary depending on language (original poems or translations) and target countries, but patterns do emerge. Mika Antić, for example, markets online dating, cosmetics, and astrology, Vasko Popa is more into carpentry and agriculture, Abdulah Sidran advertises language apps, Miloš Crnjanski and Ljubomir Micić work within the tourist industry, while Milena Marković belongs to the online pornographic and sex market. Among the selected bunch, Antun Branko Šimić is the only one whose poetry Google associates with anything remotely poetic, suggestions being, for instance, “love verses” and “sad quotes”. Who dares to say poetry does not have a utilitarian value? People need textual clichés for book dedications and wedding toasts.</p>
      <p>The question is: are we, the digital generations, going to be able to recognize our own emotions if not formulated as clichés? <mark>&#9632;</mark></p>"
sidenotes:
    - id: 1
      html: "<a href='https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Search_engine_optimization' target='_blank'>Search engine optimization</a> is the process of optimizing a website, including all the content on the website, so it will appear in prominent positions in the organic results of search engines."
    - id: 2
      html: "Kaplan, Frederic (2014) <a href='https://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/200539/files/Kaplan_Representations.pdf' target='_blank'><em>Linguistic Capitalism and Algorithmic Mediation</em></a>. Representations. 127. 57-63. 10.1525/ rep.2014.127.1.57."
    - id: 3
      html: "Thornton, Pip (2019) <a href='https://pipthornton.com/2016/06/12/poem-py-a-critique-of-linguistic-capitalism/' target='_blank'><em>{POEM}.PY</em></a>, in Balaam, M. and Hansen, L. K. (eds), <em>Wilful Technologies: Rage and Resilience</em>. Arhus Press."
    - id: 4
      html: "Thornton, Pip (2019) <em>Words as Data: The Vulnerability of Language in an Age of Digital Capitalism</em>, Crest Security Review (Spring/09), pp.8-9."
    - id: 5
      html: "Thornton, Pip (2018) <a href='https://medium.com/@pip.thornton.2013/politics-poetry-and-google-the-value-of-words-in-an-age-of-linguistic-capitalism-e559bf26c822' target='_blank'><em>Politics, Poetry and Google: The Value of Words in an Age of Linguistic Capitalism</em></a>. Medium / Linguistic Geographies. 2017."
    - id: 6
      html: "<a href='https://sites.google.com/site/projectgoethe/' target='_blank'>Serbo-Croatian Poetry Translation</a> is a good online resource for poetry from Serbia, Croatia, Montenegro, and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Poets included in the <em>Optimised Poetics</em> include <a href='https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abdulah_Sidran' target='_blank'>Abdulah Sidran</a>, <a href='https://sites.google.com/site/projectgoethe/Home/milos-crnjanski' target='_blank'>Miloš Crnjanski</a>, <a href='https://sites.google.com/site/projectgoethe/Home/antun-branko-imi' target='_blank'>Antun Branko Šimić</a>, <a href='https://sites.google.com/site/projectgoethe/Home/miroslav-antic' target='_blank'>Miroslav Antić</a>, <a href='https://www.lyrikline.org/en/poems/daj-mi-daj-mi-14060' target='_blank'>Milena Marković</a>, <a href='https://sites.google.com/site/projectgoethe/Home/vasko-popa' target='_blank'>Vasko Popa</a>, <a href='https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ljubomir_Mici%C4%87' target='_blank'>Ljubomir Micić</a>, and others."